What did I expect to learn? Personal Presentation

Upon moving to Barcelona to undertake the Erasmus+ programme, my main educational aim was to immerse myself in new modules, 
especially ones that covered the type of content I usually would not study at home. 
Being a Biochemistry student myself, I was pleasantly surprised when I found out I could study the Current Topics of Bioinformatics – 
a course that comprised of a dynamic informatic teaching of such topics from genome sequencing to Machine Learning to Programming. 
Obviously, this was only an introductory class, yet my main expectations were based in learning and managing such compelling programs 
such as Python or RStudio, ones we continuously hear people talking about, 
especially in a point in time where the proliferation of AI tools has reached a colossal magnitude.



Summary of an attended conference

After attending the 1st TAB conference, where Clara Inserte discussed innovative techniques for proper clonal evolution visualization, 
this topic became way more clearer.

Clara kicked off her presentation by telling us a bit of her personal study experience, 
where after graduating from UAB, she joined a laboratory in Germany. 
She worked in PopHumanVar, which essentially integrates functional data from databases, 
such as the Genome Project and then applies it into an interactive tour to genome visualization. 
Within the program there are multiple plots where we can visualize loads of data differently.

A brief biological explanation on Clonal Evolution was given to us, which describes the evolution of a tumour – 
if a mutation occurs in certain genes also known as the driver genes it has consequences, as the cell then escapes its usual cell cycle. 
It then transforms itself, further expanding into a tumour. 
Within the tumour all cells are the same (have the same genetic material) aka clones. 
Nonetheless, microscopic advances within oncology have shown that in fact, tumours are heterogeneous – 
we don’t know how this intratumor heterogeneity (ITH) is achieved yet. 
Clonal evolution studies how, within tumours, homogeneity evolves into heterogeneity. 
Its main challenge remains correct and regular time/checkpoint samples.
Models can be Linear, where the x axis represents time and the y axis measures clonal prevalence -
yet within this designation they can be punctuated. 
In the latter case, further mutations occurred at an early point in time and some were more prevalent than others
Models can also adopt a branching parallel evolution, other mutations occur, which causes divergent events within the cell, introducing ITH.

The 3 fundamental steps of clonal evolution reconstruction are clustering, reconstructing, and visualizing (the clonal evolution events).

Clonal evolution reconstruction starts with Clustering – where we resolve the ITH obtained after sample sequencing and variants annotation. 
Then, CCF (Cancer Cell Fractions) is calculated, variants are clustered throughout the graph according to their clone prevalence.
Then we can reconstruct the clonal evolution – it is a simple step that revolves around establishing the connection between mutations, 
their evolution and divergent levels.

Before Clara and her team`s work, there had been 2 visualisation approaches established: Fishplot and Timescape. 
They each have their own characteristics, as well as their advantages and disadvantages. 
The former is better for prevalence of clones, as we can visualize the representation of branched clonal evolution, 
yet worse for whenever there are not as many timepoints, since the latter shows time (on the x axis) in a continuous way. 
The default mode of the Timescape approach assumes an equidistant time development of the clones.

The tool developed by Clara and her team is mainly inspired by Fishplot – 
since the relative clonal prevalence offered to us by timescape visualization method is not enough. 
Also, the effect of therapy, like certain anti-tumor drugs – which account for the formation of a fish-like graph, 
cannot be visualized unless it is measured, as it is in a fishplot.

And the team`s main goals were to overcome the current visualization shortcomings and developing a basic, 
detailed and allele-level plots, whilst designing an interactive interface underlying everything previously mentioned.

How does the clevR-vis pipeline work? The inputs are the CCFs tables, whose information is essentialy the timepoints of each clone.
When submitting them, a validity check occurs, to ensure the correct ratios, and parental relations (where does each mutation come from)
seaObject is generated, where extra timepoints can be added, to confer validity and certainty to the data, as well as the therapy estimation.
Finally, input visualisation can be in three different plots: Shark, Dolphin or Plaice (same as dolphin, yet in an allele-level representation).

During the conference, Clara exemplified running a model CCF Table through the clevR-vis pipeline. 
After submitting our input and establishing the parental relationships, Clara used seaObject to insert more timepoints 
(either measured, estimated or custom.

The first plot shown was the Shark plot – yet this one does not give us any ideas regarding time, 
only the evolution of the parental relationships via a colour-coded legend. 
By adding an extended version of this plot, we obtain a point sized relative CCF scheme, which gives a further idea on parental relationships.

The dolphin plot was also explored, as well as the Plaice plot – the shape of them can either be spline or polygon. 
The bottom half of the latter plot is shown in black and white, as it represents the percentage of healthy alleles (50%). 
When the bottom part is colorful as well (even if only some parts) we are facing a bi-allelic event, 
in which no healthy allele copies have remained.
Annotations can also be added to the plots, for us to properly identify, within the plot, which gene is missing.
Clonal therapy can also be visualized within these plots, allowing us to witness the change of tumor size.

To sum up, clevR-vis combines the both previously explored fishplot and timescape approaches, 
with some cutting-edge additional features, making it easy and simple to do certain tasks such as novel allele-aware visualization, 
by being able to identify bi-allelic events briefly. 
We can also approximate the tumor`s development between measured or customised timepoints 



What did I learn

Current Topics on Bioinformatics was a certain highlight during my first semester ay UAB.  
I learned the very basics of data manipulation and its descriptive analysis, 
where I was firstly introduced to the basic grammar of ggplot2 graphics – and with it, being able to create scatter or line plots. 
This propelled effective standard data visualization – with the utter goal of communicating data clearly and concisely, 
often revealing previously unseen information.
Moreover, this course introduced me to R Studio, a programming language for statistical computing and graphics. 
With it, I worked with GWAS (Genome-Wide Association Study), 
a genome annotation programme used for wide genome scanning to identify both genetic variation and susceptibility towards certain genetic disorders.
It was beyond interesting and satisfactory to work within this branch of Biology, a subject so dear to me, 
 – where my colleagues showcased me how Biology and Informatics intertwine and its future, 
doing it so with the seminar presentations of such contemporary issues, like COVID-19, Machine Learning, or Artificial Intelligence.
My group and I also presented on Genome Databases and Annotation, 
and the research we undertook also allowed learning information regarding biological and genome-level databases, 
as well as how could we obtain information regarding genome, why should we obtain it, 
and the effective and clear ways of displaying it and viewing it.
Current Topics on Bioinformatics introduced me to a new wide range of concepts and perspectives regarding biology and its future, 
and due to my incessant need to learn new things, I cannot wait to further explore it when I return to my home university.




